Bend proof construction r33 — 2026-10-03

Actual new results

1. Compiler/BendCommittedUnroll.accepted_run is a general theorem over arbitrary
satisfying field assignments to ONE shared execution/commitment graph. With
independently pinned actual inputs, checked structural wire bounds, public
success fixed to one, and the generated network's validity, it derives every
unrolled controller tick (AcceptedRun), the embedded commitment graph, and
commitment validity. It does not assume an honest generated witness.

2. Compiler/BendCommittedPreparation.prepare_exact proves that the actual
successful prepare constructor returns the generated candidate.
prepare_payload_aliases proves that this returned candidate's commitment
payload inputs are exactly the selected execution wires. A caller's arbitrary
structural certificate is not substituted for the actual producer.

3. Protocol V5 adds a cSHAKE256 digest of the independently supplied descriptor
bytes to the initial transcript. Domain, exact u64 byte length, and all 32 digest
bytes are absorbed without reduction into fewer field elements. The public
capacity and all prior parameters remain bound. The version is explicit:
mini-bend-ir2-hiding-experimental-p3-82cfad73-artifact-cshake-v5

The constructor for_capacity preserves V4 for prior regressions. The offline
CLI now uses for_artifact and reports V5. The archived V4 evidence is historical
V4 evidence; it has not been relabelled as a V5 result.

The actual new artifact-binding test passed in 0.102 seconds. It first verifies
a proof under a descriptor with altered whitespace using the original
transcript seed (establishing that the parsed AIRs remain equivalent for this
proof), then rejects under the independently recomputed altered-artifact seed.
It also rejects the proof under V4. This is meaningful computational artifact
binding, NOT an unconditional injective map from all descriptors to a 256-bit
root, and NOT a proof of source authenticity or Fiat-Shamir soundness.

The actual full-controller/private-salt/shared-final-state commitment test was
rerun specifically because the protocol changed. It passed under V5 in
67.837 seconds, including changed initial input, success and digest refusals.
The graph and fixture are unchanged from r32: 240840 gates, 241147 arithmetic
columns, 301 public pins. No Lean fixture rerun was needed. The payload remains
the explicitly diagnostic padded raw-state codec, not the world's Result.

Dependency change: tiny-keccak 2.0.2 with cshake feature is a new direct edge to
an already pinned package. Cargo.lock changes only that root dependency edge;
no package version or git revision changed. P3 remains 82cfad73. This compiler
and native library code remain part of the trust boundary.

Reproduce the new focused native test using the checked tiny IR2 fixture:
BEND_IR2_FIXTURE=PRIVATE_FIXTURE_DIR cargo nextest run --release --locked \
  --offline --test artifact_binding \
  -E 'test(exact_artifact_profile_rejects_semantically_equal_changed_bytes)'

The r32 controller_commitment heavy test and fixture commands now exercise V5.
Do not run the whole suite to repeat these checks; generated salt, witnesses
and proof transcripts stay in owned private directories.

Remaining consequential boundaries

Native PCS verification => formal arithmetic acceptance is not proved.
Full quotient/FRI/Merkle adaptive transcript hiding and real Fiat-Shamir/QROM
soundness are not proved. Fixed-observation polynomial couplings, capacity
checks, full-degree challenge conditioning and successful proof tests do not
supply those missing theorems. No instantiated 128-bit/PQ security claim.

Actual raw controller conformance and complete reachable source coverage
remain separate producer obligations. The newer Objective language edition
needs its own semantics/refinement. Canonical frame/Keccak circuits have real
native conformance tests; a universal byte-level Keccak refinement remains
open. The actual world Accepted token's independently derived input/Result/
effects/charge codec and disclosure authorization have not yet replaced the
diagnostic raw-state statement. Existing reexecution admission is unchanged.
